Provide 2 examples of symbols which could be considered evil from each film. Explain why these can be seen as evil.

Illuminati
The murders that takes place in the movie are all caused by someone acting under the name of the Illuminati. The Illuminati can be seen as a symbol of radical science, as their goal was to achieve enlightenment through the understanding of the laws of science. Consequently, most of their actions opposed the Catholic church, and they were cast in a negative light and persecuted due to their ‘sacrilege’ against God. Patrick McKenna, the Camerlengo, is the one behind the murders, and kills his father, the Pope, due to his support of the advancement of modern science. By perpetrating the murders, McKenna, utilizes this history in order to create a symbol of evil the Catholic church can unite against in a final effort to challenge the science and the good it can bring.

The Catholic Church,
Although the main antagonist in Angels and Demons was the Camerlengo using the guise of the Illuminati, the Catholic church has also committed numerous horrible crimes. While McKenna frowns upon the Illuminati throughout the movie, Robert Langdon replies by saying how the Illuminati was never a violent group and was committed to scientific discovery, and that the Catholic church struck first by persecuting members of the Illuminati for centuries and killing them. Because of these misjudged actions, the Catholic church can be seen as evil to the modern world and to Robert Langdon, as they will defend their doctrine from disbelief using any means possible.

Nazis
A common stereotype in film, is the usage of Nazis as the antagonists in the plot. Because of the motives and actions of Adolf Hitler during World War II, Nazism has been immortalized as a group of immoral and deceitful people. Likewise, in the movie, the Nazi officer is portrayed as a sinister german man who resorts to violence to satisfy his goals, such as when he is about to brand Marion with a fire stoker; his reason to find the Ark is to be able to rise to power after Hitler seizes it. This lack of empathy for the suffering of others and lust for power can be equated to evil.

Native warriors
In the beginning of the movie, Indie and his fellow travellers are forced to avoid deadly traps set up by the natives that worship the idol. It is a common stereotype in literature and film, where native warriors are depicted as bloodthirsty creatures that will stop at nothing for the blood of their enemies. To them, not even the sight of a disfigured man pierced with arrows disturbs them. This animalistic tendency can be seen as evil because of the immoral and malevolent nature of killing

Can something claiming to protect good use evil methods? How does this apply in each film? Be specific.

In Angels and Demons, Patrick McKenna, the Camerlengo, kills his father, and creates a plot to kill four Cardinals who are the preferiti, or favoured ones, to become Pope. The reason he does this is to unite the church and to strengthen their faith against science. He believes in his actions as he is doing it for and under the name of God, and that science has gone to far and has begun to denounce God’s name. In his mind, his morality is completely dependant on his faith in Catholicism, and so for him, the consequences of the murders are outweighed by his acts for the Vatican people.

Raiders of the Lost Ark starts by showing Indiana Jones on an expedition in Peru to retrieve a golden idol. However, he loses it to his rival and returns to his University empty handed. It is then revealed that Jones has a passion for archaeology, and that he intended to retrieve it for display in a museum. Although treasure-hunting is glorified in the movie, stealing the idol greatly disrespects the tribe it belongs to, as clearly the idol is a symbol so important to the tribe that they bow down at the sight of it. In this case, Indiana Jones’ desire for human knowledge is used to justify the immoral and evil act of violating another group’s culture.

Using an accepted definition of good and evil, select 2 examples from each film which could fit both definitions. How is this possible?

According to the Oxford dictionary’s definition of good and evil, the following adjectives are tied to either concept. “Virtuous, commendable, kind, benevolent” are seen as traits of good, while “Morally reprehensible, sinful, wicked” are seen as traits of evil. In Raiders of the Lost Ark, Indiana Jones falls under both descriptions. Indiana displays many virtuous traits within the movie: he shows kindness and loyalty to his friends; in addition, he serves his country and acknowledges the consequences it will bring if he does find the Ark before the Nazis. However, he is shown to act out of impulse many times in the film. In at least two instances, one in Peru, and another when he is saved by the family he stays with, he pulls a gun on those who have wronged or betrayed him. By the end of the movie, Indiana has arguably killed more people on screen than the number of people the Nazis have even harmed. These acts are reprehensible as killing is regarded as highly immoral. In the end, however, his actions prevent the Nazis from obtaining the Ark. In this case, his acts can be justified as a lesser evil in order to prevent a greater evil. This also applies to Indiana tying Marion. He knows that freeing Marion will alert the Nazis to his presence, so he binds her against her will, an immoral act, to protect both himself, Marion, and their chances of finding the Ark.
In Angels and Demons, the Camerlengo could fall under this same description. As he committed acts of murder unbeknownst to all but a few people, Vatican City believes him to be a good man, and has their faith strengthened by what they believe to be an act of God. In other terms, his acts of evil brought about benevolent results that arguably outweigh the former. At the same time, the Catholic church also supposedly murdered scientists of the Illuminati, as they committed what they considered sins against the church’s scriptures. What can be said of this, is that perhaps is is for the better. The Church motives were to uphold the image of God, as people cope better with the idea of a benevolent God. Many are afraid of a lack of afterlife or a lack of meaning in life, so many of those people will be happier living that ideal, leading to goodness out of actions of evil.

To what extent are actions that violate religious teachings acceptable if they are used to combat or stop apparent anti-religious activities? Do these actions reflect the will of God or the will of man? Why? Use examples from the films to support your position.

The religious teachings in question, concerning Christianity, are not works of God. The writers of the Bible have one thing in common—they were all humans claiming to be writing in God’s name. Even the earliest accounts of the Bible, from the creation of the garden of Eden, were written by a man named Moses, who is said to have come hundreds of years later and is disputed to even have existed. With this in mind, the scriptures can have drastically different interpretations than what was originally intended, This is shown in the movie Angels and Demons, as both the Camerlengo and the Pope had vastly differing opinions on what was defined as the work of God. While the Pope believed that the advancement of the sciences provides a testimony of the power of God and how he works, the Camerlengo believed that with the perfection of modern science, traditional religion, and consequently the teachings of the Catholic church, would no longer be needed. McKenna treats his viewpoint as if it is more right than his peers, but he does not realize that science has strengthened the faith of all those around him, such as the Pope and the supervisor at the Hadron Collider. In this case, it is the will of man as he is only violating his own religions by murdering innocent individuals, especially his father. In Raiders of the Lost Ark, Jones does the same. He aims to retrieve the Ark in order to prevent the Nazis from using it to win the war. He acknowledges the power that the Ark holds and sees the power with his own eyes, proving that he is aware of of the abilities of God in the movie, but he retrieves the Ark using methods that are morally conflicting with what the cause he’s fighting for. He kills his enemies freely and he is unaware of the damage he is causing to those around him during the hijinks in his adventure. Because of this, it is evident that Indiana is not concerned with protecting the holiness of the object, but rather for for the self interests of his country—to protect it from the danger of the Nazi regime. For this, Indiana’s actions can be considered the will of man, not the will of God.
